Add enhancement proposal for SDN live migration (#1064)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/network/sdn-live-migration.md

### Non-Goals

- Support for migration to other network providers
- The necessary GUI change in Openshift Cluster Manager.
- The live migration of the egress IP, router and firewall configuration.
- Migration from SDN Multitenant mode

## Pre-requisites

- This solution relies on the ovnkube hybrid overlay feature. This bug 
  https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2040779 needs to be fixed.

## Proposal

The key problem of do a live SDN migration is that, we need to the connectivity 
of the cluster network during the migration, when pods are attached to different
networks. We propose to utilize the OVN Kubernetes hybrid overlay feature to
connect the networks owned by OpenShift SDN and OVN Kubernetes.

- We will run different plugins on different nodes, but both plugins will know
  how to reach pods owned by the other plugin, so all pods/services/etc remain
  connected.
- During migration, CNO will take original-plugin nodes one by one and convert
  them to destination-plugin nodes, rebooting them in the process.
- The cluster network CIDR will not change. In fact, none of the node host
  subnets will change.
- NetworkPolicy will work correctly throughout the migration.

> ### Limitations

Reviewer: Maybe describe the features called out in "non-goals" in this section in more detail?

Author: added more description below. PTAL

Reviewer: Thanks.

What if the implementation in the CNO did validations before any migration begins?  It could check the cluster for anything it knows may not work?  I know some things are difficult to check for (like multicast traffic), but some things should be relatively straight forward if it's just looking at the kube API.

Author: I think it is a good idea. I added it to the `Migration Setup` section. Thanks.

  to destination-plugin nodes, rebooting them in the process.
- The cluster network CIDR will not change. In fact, none of the node host
  subnets will change.
- NetworkPolicy will work correctly throughout the migration.

### Limitations

- Multicast is not handled by this proposal.
- Migration from SDN Multitenant mode is not handled by this proposal.

### User Stories

The service delivery (SD) team (managed OpenShift services ARO, OSD, ROSA) has a
unique set of requirements around downtime, node reboots, and high degree of
automation. Specifically, SD need a way to migrate their managed fleet in a way
that is no more impactful to the customer's workloads than an OCP upgrade, and
that can be done at scale, in a safe, automated way that can be made
self-service and not require SD to negotiate maintenance windows with customers.
The current migration solution needs to be revisited to support these
(relatively) more stringent requirements.

### Risks and Mitigations

## Design Details

The existing ovn-kubernetes hybrid overlay feature was developed for hybrid
Windows/Linux clusters. Each ovn-kubernetes node manages an external-to-OVN OVS

> bridge, named br-ext, which acts as the VXLAN source and endpoint for packets

Reviewer 2: Is there an overhead / performance impact of using VXLAN and therefore an impact to workloads on the cluster while migration is in progress?

Reviewer 3: if so, is it temp? and if so, how long will the impact last?

    have no useful OVN metadata.

#### Packets going from OVN Kubernetes to OpenShift SDN

On the ovn side:
- The packet just follow the same path of hybrid overlay. The packet just has to
  get routed out the VXLAN tunnel with VNID 0.

On the sdn side:
- We have to change ingress NetworkPolicy processing to be based entirely on pod
  IPs rather than using namespace VNIDs, since packets from ovn nodes won’t have
  the VNID set. There is already code to generate the rules that way though,
  because egress NetworkPolicy already works that way.

### The Migration Process

#### Migration Setup

1. The admin kicks off the migration process by editing the CNO configuration

2. CNO will label each existing node with, eg:

    ```yaml
    migration.network.openshift.io/plugin: OpenShiftSDN
    k8s.ovn.org/hybrid-overlay-node-subnet: 10.129.0.0/23
    ```

   (CNO knows how to figure out the host subnet by looking at openshift-sdn
   HostSubnet objects. When migrating in the reverse direction, it knows to look
   at the ovn-kubernetes annotations.)

3. CNO will redeploy the openshift-sdn DaemonSets, enabling “migration mode”,

>    and adding node affinity to the node DaemonSet:

Reviewer 2: What is the impact to the cluster as these updates happen?  If any possible disruption it should be called out in the Risks section above, even if it can be couched as no worse than any other DS rollout.

Reviewer 4: openshift-sdn-node will be restarted on each node. The restart itself is immediate. After restarting, the node process will need to reload its caches, which may take a few seconds in large clusters (eg thousands of pods), during which time it would lag in processing updates to the cluster. (So, eg, a pod launched at this time may take an extra few seconds to become ready.)

In clusters with less than thousands of pods the restart is likely to be completely unnoticeable.

          nodeSelectorTerms:
            - matchExpressions:
                - key: migration.network.openshift.io/plugin
                  operator: In
                  values: ["OpenShiftSDN"]
    ```

  so that openshift-sdn will now only run on nodes labeled
  “migration.network.openshift.io/plugin: OpenShiftSDN” (which is currently all
  of them).

4. CNO will then deploy the ovnkube-master and ovnkube-node DaemonSets, also
   enabling hybrid overlay mode” in their config, and adding equivalent node
   affinity to the ovnkube-node DaemonSet (to only run on nodes labeled
   “migration.network.openshift.io/plugin: OVNKubernetes”). Since there are not
   currently any nodes labeled that way, this means no actual ovnkube-node pods
   will be created at this step.

At this point, neither plugin is willing to run on a node that has no
“migration.network.openshift.io/plugin” label at all. This means that if a new
node gets added to the cluster in the middle of the migration process, neither
plugin will get deployed to it until after the migration of the older nodes is
complete, and the node affinity is removed.

#### Migration

> In order to run ovn-kubernetess in shared-gw mode, we need MCO to update the

Reviewer 5: OK a lot going on here.  Would it help if we had the SDN daemonset actually *live reconfigure* the service?  That's fully supported by systemd and the MCO.

ovs-configuration.service. To apply the MachineConfig update, a reboot will be

> triggered by MCO. To coordinate the draining and rebooting between CNO and MCO,

Author: I refactored the process, PTAL.

we need to modify MCO as following:
- add a `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/rebootPausedBy: network-operator`

>   node annotation to MCO, so that CNO can block MCO from rebooting the node

Reviewer 5: I like that idea a lot better indeed.

Now, I do think eventually that the MCO should offer more control to administrators and 3rd party code.  See e.g. https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/pull/2163

But short term, if we can avoid trying to "wedge" things in between the MCO changes that helps.

>   node annotation to MCO, so that CNO can block MCO from rebooting the node

Author: I took @danwinship 's suggestion and updated the document.

- add a new value `RebootPending` to the existing
  `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/state` node annotation. It will be set by
  MCD if the reboot is blocked. It indicts that draining node is done, and the
  rebooting is paused.

When we kick off the migration from CNO, CNO will update the
`status.networkType` field of the `network.config` CR. It will trigger MCO to
apply new MachineConfig to each node:
1. MCO will 
   - rerender the MachineConfig for each node

>    - try to cordon and drain the node one node

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - try to cordon and drain nodes based on MachineConfigPools.spec.maxUnavailable
```

2. CNO finds a node is being drained by MCO by watching the MCO node
   annotations, it will:
   - pause the node reboot by annotate the node with

>      `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/rebootPausedBy: network-operator`.

Reviewer 2: Risk here with watching for a drain vs proactively annotating nodes.  Possibility if there are issues in CNO the pause annotation won't be set before reboot.  Can the annotation be set before this kicks off?

Author: I refactored the process, PTAL.

3. MCO will set node annotation `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/state:
   RebootPending`, when draining node is completed.
4. CNO finds the node has been drained by MCO, it will:
   - annotate the node with ovnkube annotations:
     `k8s.ovn.org/node-subnets: '{"default":"10.131.0.0/23"}'`
   - remove the "migration.network.openshift.io/plugin" label from the node wait
     for the sdn-node DaemonSet to decrement its NumberReady
   - label the node "migration.network.openshift.io/plugin: OVNKubernetes"
   - remove the `rebootPausedBy` node annotation.
5. MCO will reboot the node
6. After booting up, br-ex will be created and ovnkube-node will run in hybrid
   overlay mode on the node.
7. MCO will uncordon the node. Pods will be created on the node using
   ovn-kubernetes as the default CNI plugin.

The above process will be repeated for each node, until all the nodes have been
applied to the new MachineConfig and converted to OVN Kubernetes.

#### Migration Cleanup

Once migration is complete, CNO will:
- delete the openshift-sdn DaemonSets
- redeploy ovn-kubernetes in “normal” mode (no migration mode config, no node

>   affinity).

Reviewer 2: Nodes are uncordoned at this point, so OVN is redeployed with workloads deployed to the node.  Is it possible to switch this over node-by-node in the migration steps above to reduce workload impacts?

Reviewer 4: This step is about fixing the state of the `ovnkube-master` and `ovnkube-node` Deployment objects. While the Deployment controller will roll the update out node-by-node, there's nothing we can do specially, since we're just talking about about updating two API objects.

Also note that all of the nodes are already running ovn-kubernetes at this point, so this is just a question of restarting the existing ovn-kubernetes binaries on each node. It should be very quick/non-disruptive.

CR by adding:

```json
{ 
  "spec": { 
    "migration": {
      "networkType": "OVNKubernetes",
      "type": "live"
    }
  } 
}
```

On removing of the `spec.migration` field, CNO will start the migration cleanup.

CNO will also report the migration state to under the `status` of
`network.operator` CR.

```json
{ 
  "status": { 
    "migration": {
      // The state can be 'Setup', 'Working', 'Done' or 'Error', 
      "state": "Working",
      // the reason needs to be filled when state is 'Error'.
      "reason": ""
    }
  } 
}
```

### Lifecycle Management

This is a one-time operation for a cluster, therefore no lifecycle management.

### Test Plan

TBD

### Graduation Criteria

Graduation criteria follows:

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

- End user documentation, relative API stability
- Sufficient test coverage
- Gather feedback from users rather than just developers

#### Tech Preview -> GA

- More testing (upgrade, scale)
- Add CI job
- Sufficient time for feedback

#### Removing a deprecated feature
N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

This is a one-time operation for a cluster, therefore no upgrade / downgrade

> strategy.

Reviewer 2: A stated goal is "The migration operation shall be able to be rolled back if needed." so how will the rollback be handled?  I don't see a better section to capture this in.

  https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2040779 needs to be fixed.

## Proposal

The key problem of do a live SDN migration is that, we need to the connectivity 
of the cluster network during the migration, when pods are attached to different
networks. We propose to utilize the OVN Kubernetes hybrid overlay feature to
connect the networks owned by OpenShift SDN and OVN Kubernetes.

- We will run different plugins on different nodes, but both plugins will know
  how to reach pods owned by the other plugin, so all pods/services/etc remain
  connected.
- During migration, CNO will take original-plugin nodes one by one and convert
  them to destination-plugin nodes, rebooting them in the process.
- The cluster network CIDR will not change. In fact, none of the node host
  subnets will change.
- NetworkPolicy will work correctly throughout the migration.

### Limitations

- Multicast may not work during the migration when the CNI plugins are running
  in parallel, but it shall work after the migration is complete.
- The following features which are only supported by OpenShift SDN but not by
  OVN Kubernetes, will stop working when the migration is started.

>   - Multitenant Isolation

Reviewer 6: @pliurh we probably want to block migration from SDN multitenant to OVNK, because I can't see how that would work at all during a migration.

nodes managed by different CNI plugins. To minimize the implementation effort,
and the code maintainability, we will try to reused the whole hybrid overlay and
only make necessary changes to both CNI plugins.

On the OVN Kubernetes side, all the cross CNI traffic shall follow the same path
of current hybrid overlay implementation. For OVN Kubernetes, we need to do
following enhancements:

1. We need to modify OVN-K to allow overlapping between the cluster network and
   the Hybrid overlay CIDR. So that we can reuse the cluster network in the
   migration.
2. We need to modify OVN-K to allow modifying the hybrid overlay CIDR on the
   fly.
3. We need to allow `hybrid-overlay-node` running on linux nodes, currently it
   is designed to only run on windows nodes. 

On the OpenShift SDN side, when a node is converted to OVN Kubernetes,
it shall be almost transparent to the control-plane. But we need to introduce a
'migration mode' for OpenShift SDN by:

1. Change ingress NetworkPolicy processing to be based entirely on pod IPs
   rather than using namespace VNIDs, since packets from ovn nodes will have
   the VNID 0 set.

> 2. To be compatible with Windows node VXLAN implementation, OVN-K hybrid overlay

Reviewer 6: We could figure out a way to disable this for ovnk...

Author: I don't know how to make it work. Even we disable it on the OVN-K side, the egress packets still cannot have the real pod MAC. In OVN-K, for all the traffic to HO nodes, the traffic will come to the cluster_router first and then route to the local br-ext bridge. So when the packets arrive at the br-ext bridge, both the src and dst mac will be changed as we cross the node subnet.

Even if we somehow manage to set the egress MACs to the real ones, I assume it will require much more code changes than we do it on the SDN side.

BTW, here is the patch I prepared for SDN https://github.com/openshift/sdn/compare/master...pliurh:sdn:live-migration.

   uses the host interface MAC as VXLAN inner MAC. When packets arrive at the
   br0 of the SDN node, they cannot be forwarded to the pod interface, due to
   the MAC mismatch. We need to add flows for each pod which swaps the dst MAC
   to the pod interface mac.

### The Traffic Path

#### Packets going from OpenShift SDN to OVN Kubernetes

On the SDN side, it doesn't need to know if the peer node is a SDN node or a OVN
node. We reuse the existing VXLAN tunnel rules one the SDN side.
- Egress NetworkPolicy rules and service proxying happen as normal
- When the packet reaches table 90, it will hit a “send via vxlan” rule that was
  generated based on a HostSubnet object.

On the OVN side:
- OVN accepts the packet via the VXLAN tunnel, ignore the VNID set by SDN and
  then just routes it normally.
- Ingress NetworkPolicy processing will happen when the packet reaches the
  destination pod’s switch port, just like normal.
  - Our NetworkPolicy rules are all based on IP addresses, not “logical input
    port”, etc, so it doesn’t matter that the packets came from outside OVN and
    have no useful OVN metadata.

> #### Packets going from OVN Kubernetes to OpenShift SDN

Reviewer 6: We'll also have to modify the hybrid overlay code to handle SDN nodes having HostSubnets within the ClusterCIDR; because Windows HO doesn't do that. So I guess ovnkube will have to learn about HostSubnet resources, or maybe the SDN code could annotate its nodes with the right bits so ovnkube can grab them subnets.

Author: Instead of letting ovnkube-master read the HostSubnet CR, I plan to run the `hybrid-overlay-node` binary on the SDN nodes. It will be responsible for reading the HostSubnets CR and annotating the node. So it won't affect the current Windows HO logic.

Reviewer 7: oh this is why you need to run hybrid-overlay-node on linux nodes. You should make that clear in my earlier comment that it is for linux nodes running openshift-sdn

Author: will do

On the ovn side:
- The packet just follow the same path of hybrid overlay. The packet just has to
  get routed out the VXLAN tunnel with VNID 0.

On the sdn side:

> - We have to change ingress NetworkPolicy processing to be based entirely on pod

Author: I am not quite sure how much effort it would be. According to @danwinship 's comments, it should not be too much.

  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SDN-2612
status: implementable
---

# SDN Live Migration

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary
Migrating the CNI network provider network of a running cluster from
OpenShift SDN to OVN Kubernetes without service interruption. During the
migration, we will partition the cluster into two sets of nodes controlled by
different network plugins. We will utilize the Hybrid overlay feature of
OVN Kubernetes to connect the networks of the two CNI network plugins. So that
pods on each side can still talk to the pods on the other side.

## Motivation

For some Openshift users, they have very high requirement on service
availability. The current SDN migration solution, that will cause a service
interruption, is not acceptable.

### Goals

- Migrate the cluster network provider from OpenShift SDN to OVN Kubernetes for a 
  existing cluster.

> - This's in-place migration without requiring extra nodes.

Reviewer 7: nit: This is

  subnets will change.
- NetworkPolicy will work correctly throughout the migration.

### Limitations

- Multicast may not work during the migration when the CNI plugins are running
  in parallel, but it shall work after the migration is complete.
- The following features which are only supported by OpenShift SDN but not by
  OVN Kubernetes, will stop working when the migration is started.
  - Multitenant Isolation
- The Egress Router feature is supported by both OpenShift SDN and OVN
  Kubernetes but with different design and implementation. Therefore even with
  the same name, it have different API and configure logic between OpenShift
  SDN and OVN Kubernetes. Also, the supported platforms and modes are different
  between the two network providers. So users need to evaluate before conducting
  the live migration, and have to migrate the configuration manually after the
  migration is complete.
- The following features are supported by both OpenShift SDN and OVN Kubernetes.
  And we have support automated converting for the configuration. However, users
  shall not expect these feature can function as normal during the live
  migration phase.
  - Egress IP

>   - Egress Firewall

Author: Yes. This is a 4.12 epic https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NP-20.

### Risks and Mitigations

## Design Details

The existing ovn-kubernetes hybrid overlay feature was developed for hybrid
Windows/Linux clusters. Each ovn-kubernetes node manages an external-to-OVN OVS
bridge, named br-ext, which acts as the VXLAN source and endpoint for packets
moving between pods on the node and their cluster-external destination. The
br-ext SDN switch acts as a transparent gateway and routes traffic towards
windows nodes.

In the SDN live migration use case, we can enhance this feature to connects the
nodes managed by different CNI plugins. To minimize the implementation effort,
and the code maintainability, we will try to reused the whole hybrid overlay and
only make necessary changes to both CNI plugins.

On the OVN Kubernetes side, all the cross CNI traffic shall follow the same path
of current hybrid overlay implementation. For OVN Kubernetes, we need to do
following enhancements:

1. We need to modify OVN-K to allow overlapping between the cluster network and
   the Hybrid overlay CIDR. So that we can reuse the cluster network in the
   migration.
2. We need to modify OVN-K to allow modifying the hybrid overlay CIDR on the
   fly.

> 3. We need to allow `hybrid-overlay-node` running on linux nodes, currently it

Author: This is for the nodes using OpenShiftSDN as the CNI plugin. So no `ovnkube-node` process will be running on those nodes. We want to run hybrid-overlay-node binary on those nodes to get the `distributed-router-gateway-mac`. Here's the PR for ovn-k https://github.com/ovn-org/ovn-kubernetes/pull/3037.

  the VNID set. There is already code to generate the rules that way though,
  because egress NetworkPolicy already works that way.

### Workflow Description

#### Migration Setup

1. The admin kicks off the migration process by updating the custom resource
   `network.operator`:
   
   ```bash
   $ oc patch Network.operator.openshift.io cluster --type='merge' --patch '{"spec":{"migration":{"networkType":"OVNKubernetes","isLive":true}}}"
   ```
   
   CNO will check if there is any unsupported feature (refer the
   [Limitations](#limitations) section) enabled in the cluster. If yes, it will
   set an warning message under the `status.migration` field of the custom
   resource `network.operator`.

2. CNO will redeploy the openshift-sdn in the __migration mode__. It will add a
   condition check to the wrapper script of the sdn DaemonSet, to see if the
   bridge `br-ex` exists on the node . If `br-ex` exists, it means the node has
   already been updated by MCO, therefore it's ready for running OVN Kubernetes,
   the sdn pod would just do "sleep infinity" rather than actually launching the
   `openshift-sdn-node` process.

> 3. CNO will also deploy OVN Kubernetes to the cluster with hybrid overlay

Reviewer 7: so at this step will ovnkube-master be brought up on the control nodes without blocking/waiting for anything?

Author: No, it doesn't need to. At this moment, `ovnkube-node` process won't be running on any node. We only have the ovn-k control-plane deployed.

   enabled. The ovnkube-node DaemonSet wrapper script also has the logic to
   check if the bridge br-ex exists on the node. If `br-ex` doesn't exist, it
   means the node has yet been updated by MCO, so instead of starting the

>    `ovnkube-node` process, it would run `hybrid-overlay-node` process that

Reviewer 7: cool

     `MachineConfigPools.spec.maxUnavailable`
2. CNO will be able to find a node is being drained by MCO by watching the MCO
   node annotations, it will clear the `k8s.ovn.org/hybrid-overlay-xxx` node
   annotation then set the annotation `k8s.ovn.org/node-subnets:` according to
   the HostSubnet object of the node to bypass the ovnkube node subnet
   allocation. 
3. CNO will also update the hybrid overlay configuration and the onvkube-master
   pods will take the updated hybrid overlay configuration then update the OVN
   database.
4. MCO will drain and reboot the node.
5. After booting up, br-ex will be created and ovnkube-node will run in hybrid
   overlay mode on the node.
6. The wrapper script of ovnkube-node DaemonSet will see br-ex, then launch the
   `ovnkube-node` process.
7. MCO will uncordon the node. Pods will be created on the node using
   ovn-kubernetes as the default CNI plugin.

The above process will be repeated for each node, until all the nodes have been
applied to the new MachineConfig and converted to OVN Kubernetes.

#### Migration Cleanup

Once migration is complete, CNO will:
- delete the openshift-sdn DaemonSets

> - redeploy ovn-kubernetes in "normal" mode (no migration mode config, no node

Reviewer 7: but still hybrid overlay enabled?

Author: hybrid overlay disabled

  affinity).
- remove the migration-related labels from the nodes

### API

To start the migration, users need to update the `network.operator`
CR by adding:

CNO will deploy both OpenShift SDN and OVN Kubernetes pods in 'migration' mode.

```json
{ 
  "spec": { 
    "migration": {
      "networkType": "OVNKubernetes",

>       "isLive": true

Reviewer 7: what is the significance of "isLive"? Is this a new field with this enhancement?

## Motivation

For some Openshift users, they have very high requirement on service
availability. The current SDN migration solution, that will cause a service
interruption, is not acceptable.

### Goals

- Migrate the cluster network provider from OpenShift SDN to OVN Kubernetes for a 
  existing cluster.
  - The OVN Kubernetes will be running in the multi-zone IC mode.
- This solution shall work in all platforms managed by the SD team.
  - ARO (Azure Red Hat OpenShift)
  - OSDv4 (OpenShift Dedicated) on GCP
  - OSDv4 (OpenShift Dedicated) on AWS
  - ROSA Classic (Red Hat OpenShift Service on AWS)
- This is in-place migration without requiring extra nodes.
- The impact to workload of the migration shall be similar as an OCP upgrade.
- The solution can work in scale, e.g. in a large cluster with 100+ nodes.
- The migration operation shall be able to be rolled back if needed.

### Non-Goals

- Support for migration to other network providers
- The necessary GUI change in Openshift Cluster Manager.
- Ensure the following features remain working during live migration:
  - Egress IP
  - Egress Router
  - Egress Firewall
  - Multicast
- Migration from SDN Multi-tenant mode

> - Migrate to OVN Kubernetes single-zone IC mode.

Author: It means all nodes are in one zone. I am not sure if we will support this in OCP. If not, I can remove it. @tssurya

> - Migrate to OVN Kubernetes single-zone IC mode.

Reviewer 8: I think making it explicit that it's an OVN IC zone, and not for example an AWS availability zone would be helpful.

> - Migrate to OVN Kubernetes single-zone IC mode.

Reviewer 4: (I meant specifically "what does this imply" in terms of like "Does this mean X% of users won't be able to use the migration?" "Does this mean early adopters won't be able to use the migration but late-adopters will?" etc.)

> - Migrate to OVN Kubernetes single-zone IC mode.

Reviewer 4: yeah, removing it sounds right then

  how to reach pods owned by the other plugin, so all pods/services/etc remain
  connected.
- During migration, CNO will take original-plugin nodes one by one and convert
  them to destination-plugin nodes, rebooting them in the process.
- The cluster network CIDR will remain unchanged, so does the node host subnet
  of each node.
- NetworkPolicy will work correctly throughout the migration.

### Limitations

- The following features which are only supported by OpenShift SDN but not by
  OVN Kubernetes, will stop working when the migration is started.
  - Multitenant Isolation
- The Egress Router feature is supported by both OpenShift SDN and OVN
  Kubernetes but with different design and implementation. Therefore even with
  the same name, it have different API and configure logic between OpenShift
  SDN and OVN Kubernetes. Also, the supported platforms and modes are different
  between the two network providers. So users need to evaluate before conducting
  the live migration, and have to migrate the configuration manually after the
  migration is complete.
- The following features are supported by both OpenShift SDN and OVN Kubernetes.

>   And we have support automated converting for the configuration. However, users

Reviewer 4: How "automated" is automated? When does this happen? (The "Workflow Description" below doesn't mention it.)

Author: This has already been implemented https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NP-20.

  shall not expect these feature can function as normal during the live
  migration phase.
  - Multicast
  - Egress IP

>   - Egress Firewall

Reviewer 8: I'm also wondering if "stop working" means fail open or fail closed. It should be explicit in documentation for our customers to make an informed decision on when and how to proceed.

   fly.
4. We need to allow `hybrid-overlay-node` running on the linux nodes using
   OpenShift SDN as CNI plugin, currently it is designed to only run on windows
   nodes. It is responsible for: 
   - collecting the MAC address of the host primary interface, and set the node
     annotation `k8s.ovn.org/hybrid-overlay-distributed-router-gateway-mac`.
   - removing the pod annotations added by OVN Kubernetes for pods running on
     local node.

On the OpenShift SDN side, when a node is converted to OVN Kubernetes, it shall
be almost transparent to the control-plane of OpenShift SDN. But we still need
to introduce a 'migration mode' for OpenShift SDN by:

1. Change ingress NetworkPolicy processing to be based entirely on pod IPs
   rather than using namespace VNIDs, since packets from ovn nodes will have
   the VNID 0 set.
2. To be compatible with Windows node VXLAN implementation, OVN-K hybrid overlay
   uses the peer host interface MAC as VXLAN inner dest MAC for egress traffic.
   Therefore when packets arrive at the br0 of the SDN node, they cannot be
   forwarded to the pod interface correctly. We need to add flows for each pod

>    to change the dst MAC to the pod interface MAC.

Author: No, it wasn't. I had an unmerged patch for that. And yes, you're right we can use one flow to do this.

### The Traffic Path

#### Packets going from OpenShift SDN to OVN Kubernetes

On the SDN side, it doesn't need to know if the peer node is a SDN node or a OVN
node. We reuse the existing VXLAN tunnel rules one the SDN side.
- Egress NetworkPolicy rules and service proxying happen as normal
- When the packet reaches table 90, it will hit a "send via vxlan" rule that was

>   generated based on a HostSubnet object.

Author: HostSubnet CRs will be removed when the migration is done. So in rollback or the reverse migration(It isn't our target) scenario, we will use the bootstrap script in ovnkube-node container to create the HostSubnet CRs. I'll add the detail in the enhancement.

   already been updated by MCO, therefore it's ready for running OVN Kubernetes,
   the sdn pod would just do "sleep infinity" rather than actually launching the
   `openshift-sdn-node` process.

3. CNO will also deploy OVN Kubernetes to the cluster with hybrid overlay
   enabled. The ovnkube-node DaemonSet wrapper script also has the logic to
   check if the bridge br-ex exists on the node. If `br-ex` doesn't exist, it
   means the node has yet been updated by MCO, so instead of starting the
   `ovnkube-node` process, it would run `hybrid-overlay-node` process that
   discover the necessary hybrid overlay node information and annotate node
   accordingly e.g.:

   ```yaml
   k8s.ovn.org/hybrid-overlay-distributed-router-gateway-mac: 00-c2-f5-92-28-ad
   k8s.ovn.org/hybrid-overlay-node-subnet: 192.168.111.20/24
   ```

   otherwise it would launch the `ovnkube-node` process.

#### Migration

We can kick off the migration from CNO, by:

```bash
$ oc patch Network.config.openshift.io cluster --type='merge' --patch '{"spec":{"networkType":"OVNKubernetes"}'
```

CNO will update the `status.networkType` field of the `network.config` CR. It

> will trigger MCO to apply new MachineConfig to each node:

Reviewer 4: what new MachineConfig?

Author: The new MachineConfig is rendered for running OVN-K.

Reviewer 4: ok but you haven't mentioned any MachineConfig existing or being created yet, or what it contains, etc

Author: I added more details.

   the HostSubnet object of the node to bypass the ovnkube node subnet
   allocation. 
3. CNO will also update the hybrid overlay configuration and the onvkube-master
   pods will take the updated hybrid overlay configuration then update the OVN
   database.
4. MCO will drain and reboot the node.
5. After booting up, br-ex will be created and ovnkube-node will run in hybrid
   overlay mode on the node.
6. The wrapper script of ovnkube-node DaemonSet will see br-ex, then launch the
   `ovnkube-node` process.
7. MCO will uncordon the node. Pods will be created on the node using
   ovn-kubernetes as the default CNI plugin.

The above process will be repeated for each node, until all the nodes have been
applied to the new MachineConfig and converted to OVN Kubernetes.

#### Migration Cleanup

Once migration is complete, CNO will:
- delete the openshift-sdn DaemonSets
- redeploy ovn-kubernetes in "normal" mode (no migration mode config, no node
  affinity, hybrid overlay disabled).
- remove the migration-related labels from the nodes

### API

A new field `spec.migration.isLive` will be introduced to the CRD
`networks.operator.openshift.io`. Users can set this flag to conduct a live

> migration or a offline migration.

Reviewer 4: Why do we want to continue supporting the offline migration?

(If we are keeping this field, I feel like `live` is a better name than `isLive`. It seems wrong to say "is" since the migration isn't actually happening yet at that point... it's more like `willBeLive`...)

Author: Initially, the live migration is only for clusters managed by the SD team. For other customers, they will keep using the offline migration, until we're confident to have live migration work on all platforms.

    "migration": {
      "networkType": "OVNKubernetes",
      // isLive indicates whether we're doing a live migration or not.
      "isLive": true
    }
  } 
}
```

On removing of the `spec.migration` field, CNO will start the migration cleanup
and redeploy the target CNI in 'normal' mode.

CNO will also report the migration state to under the `status` of
`network.operator` CR.

```json
{ 
  "status": { 
    "migration": {
      // The state can be 'Setup', 'Working', 'Done' or 'Error', 
      "state": "Working",
      // the reason needs to be filled when state is 'Error'.
      "reason": ""
    }
  } 
}
```

### Rollback

Users shall be able to rollback to openshift-sdn after the migration is
complete. The migration is bidirectional, thus users can follow the similar
above-mentioned procedure to conduct the rollback.

### Lifecycle Management

This is a one-time operation for a cluster, therefore no lifecycle management.

### Test Plan

We need to setup a CI job which can run the sig-network test against a cluster
that is in an intermediate state of live migration, specifically some nodes are
running with OVN Kubernetes, and the rests are running with OpenShift SDN. So

> that we can ensure the cluster network remains functioning during the migration.

Reviewer 4: Depending on how long it takes to do a migration vs how long it takes to run the e2e suite, you could possibly have a job that just migrates the cluster back and forth until the e2e suite completes?

Author: Do we test the upgrade in this way?

`status.networkType` is `OVNKubernetes`; it will not otherwise. So the change of
the `status.networkType` field will trigger MCO to apply a new MachineConfig to
each node:

1. MCO will 
   - render the MachineConfig for each node.
   - try to cordon and drain the nodes based on
     `MachineConfigPools.spec.maxUnavailable`
2. MCO will drain and reboot the node.
3. When the node is up, br-ex will be created. It means the node is ready for
   OVN Kubernetes. So the local zone OVN Kubernetes components can be started.
   The ovnkube-node container wrapper script will also add the node annotation
  `k8s.ovn.org/node-subnets`, according to the HostSubnet CR of this node.
4. On the local node, OVN Kubernetes will add all SDN nodes as hybrid overlay
   nodes to the local zone and all OVN nodes as OVN-IC remote zones. On a remote
   OVN node, OVN Kubernetes will remove a hybrid overlay node and add an OVN-IC
   remote zone.
5. MCO will uncordon the node. Pods will be recreated on the node using
   ovn-kubernetes as the default CNI plugin.

The above process will be repeated for each node until all the nodes have been
applied to the new MachineConfig and converted to OVN Kubernetes.

> #### Migration Cleanup

Reviewer 9: Is this a manual step where the user will patch the net work config the remove the migration setting or is this step automatically triggered by CNO?

Reviewer 2: Could a section be added that captures all the manual steps in one place?  I'd like to be sure we understand this when looking at the implications to managed openshift.  Thanks!

Author: I added the Operation Procedure chapter. PTAL.

applied to the new MachineConfig and converted to OVN Kubernetes.

#### Migration Cleanup

Once migration is complete, CNO will:
- delete the openshift-sdn DaemonSets and the related resources
  (CustomResources, ConfigMaps, etc).
- redeploy ovn-kubernetes in "normal" mode (no migration mode script, hybrid
  overlay disabled, etc).
- remove the migration-related labels and node annotations from the nodes.
      // live indicates whether we're doing a live migration or not.

### API

A new field `spec.migration.live` will be introduced to the CRD
`networks.operator.openshift.io`. Users can set this flag to conduct a live
migration or a offline migration.

To start the migration, users need to update the `network.operator`
CR by adding:

CNO will deploy both OpenShift SDN and OVN Kubernetes pods in 'migration' mode.

```json
{ 
  "spec": { 
    "migration": {
      "networkType": "OVNKubernetes",
      // live indicates whether we're doing a live migration or not.
      "live": true
    }
  } 
}
```

On removing of the `spec.migration` field, CNO will start the migration cleanup
and redeploy the target CNI in 'normal' mode.

> ```

Reviewer 7: this causes the entire rest of the doc to be in a code block

Author: Fixed.

1. Change ingress NetworkPolicy processing to be based entirely on pod IPs
   rather than using namespace VNIDs, since packets from ovn nodes will have
   the VNID 0 set.
2. To be compatible with Windows node VXLAN implementation, OVN Kubernetes hybrid overlay
   uses the peer host interface MAC as VXLAN inner dest MAC for egress traffic.
   Therefore when packets arrive at the br0 of the SDN node, they cannot be
   forwarded to the pod interface correctly. We need to add the a flow to change
   the dst MAC to the pod interface MAC for such ingress traffic.

### MTU Consideration

There're two related but distinct MTU values to consider, the hardware MTU and
cluster MTU. The cluster MTU is the MTU value of pod interfaces. It is always
less than your hardware MTU to account for the cluster network overlay overhead.
The overhead is is 100 bytes for OVN Kubernetes and 50 bytes for SDN. For
example, the hardware MTU is 1500, then the auto-probed cluster MTU would be
1400 for OVN Kubernetes and 1450 OpenShift SDN. During the migration, this MTU
mismatch would break some cross CNI traffic.

To avoid this issue, before starting the migration, users need to decrease the

> cluster MTU by 50 bytes following this instruction

Reviewer 8: Will the migration tool provide a check for the users that confirms the network MTU has enough headspace vs. the machine MTU before proceeding?

Author: Yes, we can add this check to CNO. But if the check result shows that an MTU migration is required, the user shall do it before conducting the migration.

- When the packet reaches table 90, it will hit a "send via vxlan" rule that was
  generated based on a HostSubnet object.

On the OVN side:
- OVN accepts the packet via the VXLAN tunnel, ignores the VNID set by SDN, and
  then just routes it normally.
- Ingress NetworkPolicy processing will happen when the packet reaches the
  destination pod's switch port, just like normal.
  - Our NetworkPolicy rules are all based on IP addresses, not "logical input
    port", etc., so it doesn't matter that the packets came from outside OVN and
    have no useful OVN metadata.

#### Packets going from OVN Kubernetes to OpenShift SDN

On the OVN side:
- The packet just follows the same path as the hybrid overlay.

On the SDN side:
- We have to change ingress NetworkPolicy processing to be based entirely on pod
  IPs rather than using namespace VNIDs since packets from OVN nodes won't have
  the VNID set. There is already code to generate the rules that way, though,
  because egress NetworkPolicy already works that way.

### Workflow Description

1. The admin kicks off the migration process by updating the custom resource
   `network.config`:
   
   ```bash

>    $ oc patch Network.config.openshift.io cluster --type='merge' --patch '{"metadata":{"annotations":{"network.openshift.io/live-migration":""}},"spec":{"networkType":"OVNKubernetes"}}'

Reviewer 9: Should the annotation read as `network-type-live-migration` and statuses read as `NetworkTypeLiveMigration...` so it is clear it is about network type migration? Perhaps they could be condensed and remove the `live` part of it if there is no confusion possible with the offline migration since that one does not have similar annotations or statuses.

   ```
   
   CNO will set the `LiveMigrationProgressing` condition to TRUE in the `status` of
   the network.config CR. If there are any unsupported features (refer to the
   [Limitations](#limitations) section) enabled in the cluster. CNO will
   set an the `LiveMigrationProgressing` condition to `False` with warning message
   and won't start the live migration. User shall disable these unsupported
   feature before starting the live migration.

2. CNO will check the current hardware MTU and the cluster MTU to see if there
   is enough free space for OVN-K overlay overhead. If not, sets the
   `.status.migration.mtu` of network.config CR with MTU of OVN-k, e.g.:
   - `.status.migration.mtu.network.from` 1450 `to` 1400

>    - `.status.migration.mtu.machine.from` 1500 `to` 1500

Author: This a mistake. CNO shall set the `spec.migration` of the `network.operator` CR.

   
   This will trigger MCO to apply a new machine config to each MCP and reboots
   all the nodes.

3. CNO watches the MCP, wait until the MCs with routable MTU is applied to all

>    the nodes. CNO then sets the `LiveMigrationRoutableMTUApplied` condition to

Author: In this design, we try to make the `network.config` API be declarative. The `network.operator` API still works in the old way. So it would need extra effort to make the MTU migration be declarative and automated.

>    the nodes. CNO then sets the `LiveMigrationRoutableMTUApplied` condition to

Reviewer 9: I was not suggesting to cover a declarative MTU migration in this spec, but rather think ahead of time whether some statuses should be shared in case that ever happens in the future.

In any case though, `RoutableMTU` looks as an implantation detail as well. Could it just read `LiveMigrationMTUApplied` or `LiveMigrationMTUReady` or something like that?

   Kubernetes. The sdn pod would just sleep infinity rather than actually
   launching the `openshift-sdn-node` process.

   CNO will also deploy OVN Kubernetes to the cluster with hybrid overlay
   enabled. To avoid racing, the host subnet allocation will be disabled in
   OVN Kubernetes.
      
   The ovnkube-node container wrapper script will be rendered with the logic for
   migration:

   - If `br-ex` doesn't exist, it means the node has not yet been updated by
     MCO, so instead of starting the `ovnkube-node` process, it would run the
     `hybrid-overlay-node` process. `hybrid-overlay-node` can add the node
     annotation `k8s.ovn.org/hybrid-overlay-distributed-router-gateway-mac`,
     which is required by hybrid overlay.

     The script will also add the node annotation
     `k8s.ovn.org/hybrid-overlay-node-subnet`, according to the HostSubnet CR of
      this node.

   - If `br-ex` does exist, it means the node has been updated by MCO. So the
     `ovnkube-node` can be started.

     The script will also add the node annotation `k8s.ovn.org/node-subnets`
     according to the HostSubnet CR of this node.
     

>    CNO wait until OVN-K is deployed in the cluster Set the

Reviewer 9: nit: `... will wait ... and set ...`

     can be started. The ovnkube-node container wrapper script will also add the
     node annotation `k8s.ovn.org/node-subnets`, according to the HostSubnet CR
     of this node. On the local node, OVN Kubernetes will add all SDN nodes as
     hybrid overlay nodes to the local zone and all OVN nodes as OVN-IC remote
     zones. On a remote OVN node, OVN Kubernetes will remove a hybrid overlay
     node and add an OVN-IC remote zone. Pods will be recreated on the node
     using ovn-kubernetes as the default CNI plugin.
   - MCO will uncordon the node. New pods can be scheduled to this node.

   The above process will be repeated for each node until all the nodes have
   been applied to the new MachineConfig and converted to OVN Kubernetes.

7. CNO watches the MCPs, wait until the new MCs is applied to all the nodes. Set
   the `LiveMigrationTargetMachineConfigApplied` condition to `TRUE` in the
   status of the network.config CR.

8. CNO removes the `spec.migration` field of network.operator CR. It will
   trigger the CNO to:

   - delete the openshift-sdn DaemonSets and the related resources
     (CustomResources, ConfigMaps, etc.).

>    - redeploy ovn-kubernetes in "normal" mode (no migration mode script, hybrid

Reviewer 9: is this when host subnet allocation will be re-enabled? Maybe worth mentioning.

     overlay disabled, etc.).

>    - remove the migration-related labels and node annotations from the nodes.

Reviewer 9: I guess you mean hybrid overlay annotations?

Reviewer 9: Not sure if this is is a yes or a no. I noticed no changes here.

9. CNO wait until OVN-K is redeployed Set the `LiveMigrationOriginalCNIPurged`
   condition to `TRUE` in the status of the network.config CR. Then set the
   `LiveMigrationProgressing` condition to `FALSE` with the reason
   `LiveMigrationCompleted` in the status of the network.config CR. This
   indicates that the migration is completed.

### API

For `Network.config.openshift.io` CRD, we will use the CR annotation
`network.openshift.io/live-migration:` to gate the modification to
`spec.networkType` field. If the annotation absents (default), CNO will block
the change to take effect. If it exists, CNO takes it as the trigger of starting
SDN live migration.

The following conditions will be added to the `.status` of the
`Network.config.openshift.io` CR:

> - LiveMigrationProgressing

Reviewer 9: Is it ok that `LiveMigrationProgressing` is never set to false if it is stuck or failed for whatever reason? Should this read differently, like `LiveMigrationInProgress`.

Author: Yes, if `LiveMigrationProgressing` got stuck in `FALSE`. It means the is an error in the live migration. It's an indicator to the user that he needs to fix the issue first.

Reviewer 9: Perhaps worth mentioning somewhere as well. I read that the only reason for this to be set to false is if non-migratable features are in use.

Also, if there is no mention of any specific implementation needed to support the remediation of such cases, I guess that means that the procedure is supposed to automatically resume progressing once the user has fixed the issue or that otherwise it needs to be handled on a case by case basis through support? I think it would be useful to have a mention about this as well.

Author: I added more details. PTAL.

- LiveMigrationRoutableMTUApplied

> - LiveMigrationTargetCNIReady

Reviewer 9: `LiveMigrationTargetCNIReady` might be ambiguous. The target CNI is redeployed several times after the step where this is set to true and each of those deployments could fail on its own while this would still read as true.

Maybe `LiveMigrationTargetCNIConfigured` or `LiveMigrationTargetCNIPrepared` or LiveMigrationTargetCNIAvailable`?

Author: ok, let use `LiveMigrationTargetCNIInUse`

> - LiveMigrationTargetMachineConfigApplied

Reviewer 9: `LiveMigrationTargetMachineConfigApplied` reads to me like an implementation detail. Could we come up with a different name? Maybe `LiveMigrationTargetCNIInUse`

> - LiveMigrationOriginalCNIPurged

Reviewer 9: I am unsure about the need and the meaning of some these status entries. Are they merely informative, or are they needed for something else, like enabling specific troubleshooting procedures that will be documented? Or do they follow a design pattern?

I am concerned that the value of these statuses can be confusing if there several migration procedures are attempted. Should they be reset to false when a new migration or rollback is started?

I will leave it up to @cblecker and @jewzaam as I am sure they are more knowledgeable than me on how statuses can be leveraged.

Author: These conditions will be used by CNO to determine the current state of live migration. These conditions will be set to ` FALSE` when a live migration is triggered and reset to `UNKNOW` when a live migration is completed. Also, they will be used for troubleshooting.

Reviewer 9: Isn't all this worth mentioning here or is it a common design pattern with status conditions? You mentioned to me there might be documentation around this. Could you refer me to it? Thanks!

Author: Yes, I can add this here. Here's the document about conditions https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#typical-status-properties

  the VNID set. There is already code to generate the rules that way, though,
  because egress NetworkPolicy already works that way.

### Workflow Description

1. The admin kicks off the migration process by updating the custom resource
   `network.config`:
   
   ```bash
   $ oc patch Network.config.openshift.io cluster --type='merge' --patch '{"metadata":{"annotations":{"network.openshift.io/live-migration":""}},"spec":{"networkType":"OVNKubernetes"}}'
   ```
   
   CNO will set the `LiveMigrationProgressing` condition to TRUE in the `status` of
   the network.config CR. If there are any unsupported features (refer to the
   [Limitations](#limitations) section) enabled in the cluster. CNO will
   set an the `LiveMigrationProgressing` condition to `False` with warning message
   and won't start the live migration. User shall disable these unsupported
   feature before starting the live migration.

2. CNO will check the current hardware MTU and the cluster MTU to see if there
   is enough free space for OVN-K overlay overhead. If not, sets the
   `.status.migration.mtu` of network.config CR with MTU of OVN-k, e.g.:
   - `.status.migration.mtu.network.from` 1450 `to` 1400

>    - `.status.migration.mtu.machine.from` 1500 `to` 1500

Reviewer 10: Is this dynamic based on what the current settings are? Will it be restored afterwards to the previous setting? While most clusters within a cloud will have similar settings, the use of certain features (e.g. AWS Local Zones) necessitates a lower network overlay MTU (ref https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/installing/installing_aws/installing-aws-localzone.html#edge-machine-pools-aws-local-zones_installing-aws-localzone)

Author: Yes. The new cluster MTU will be calculated based on the value of the machine MTU and the current cluster MTU.

Author: For AWS localzone instance, the underlay/machine MTU is 1300. It will not be changed by the migration. The migration only changes the overlay/cluster MTU which is the MTU used by the pod interfaces. So in your case, the calculated cluster MTU is 1250 for O-SDN, and 1200 for OVN-K. So after the migration. The cluster will be 1200.

Reviewer 10: Okay, I understand now a bit more clearly although not all of your statement about local zones is correct. The machines themselves have an MTU of 9001 like other AWS nodes, but you do need to lower the overlay network MTU because the inter-zone networking in AWS for local zones to non-local zones is 1300, minus any overhead.

So for an SDN cluster with local zone nodes, I would expect the cluster/overlay MTU to be 1250, and for OVN it would be 1200 like you indicate. And for a default installed AWS cluster with no local zones, the overlay network MTU would be 8951 for SDN, and 8001 for OVN.

Thanks for clarifying!

to introduce a 'migration mode' for OpenShift SDN by:

1. Change ingress NetworkPolicy processing to be based entirely on pod IPs
   rather than using namespace VNIDs, since packets from OVN nodes will have the
   VNID 0 set.
2. To be compatible with Windows node VXLAN implementation, OVN Kubernetes
   hybrid overlay uses the peer host interface MAC as the VXLAN inner dest MAC
   for egress traffic. Therefore, when packets arrive at the br0 of the SDN
   node, they cannot be forwarded to the pod interface correctly. We need to add
   a flow to change the dst MAC to the pod interface MAC for such ingress
   traffic.

### MTU Consideration

There are two related but distinct MTU values to consider: the hardware MTU and
the cluster MTU. The cluster MTU is the MTU value for pod interfaces. It is
always less than your hardware MTU to account for the cluster network overlay
overhead. The overhead is 100 bytes for OVN Kubernetes and 50 bytes for SDN. For
example, if the hardware MTU is 1500, then the auto-probed cluster MTU would be
1400 for OVN Kubernetes and 1450 for OpenShift SDN. During the migration, this
MTU mismatch would break some cross-CNI traffic.

> To avoid this issue, before starting the migration, users need to decrease the

Reviewer 11: Is MTU migration automated or not?
This sentence suggests that it is not but there is also this one:
```
CNO will check the current hardware MTU and the cluster MTU to see if there is enough free space for OVN-K overlay overhead
```

Author: MTU migration will be part of the live migration, so it will be automated. Let me make the sentences more clear.

Reviewer 9: Just a clarification: it is only automated in the scope of this procedure because it doesn't contemplate the need to update the physical network MTU. This probably worth adding as well.

  `k8s.ovn.org/node-subnets`, according to the HostSubnet CR of this node.
4. On the local node, OVN Kubernetes will add all SDN nodes as hybrid overlay
   nodes to the local zone and all OVN nodes as OVN-IC remote zones. On a remote
   OVN node, OVN Kubernetes will remove a hybrid overlay node and add an OVN-IC
   remote zone.
5. MCO will uncordon the node. Pods will be recreated on the node using
   ovn-kubernetes as the default CNI plugin.

The above process will be repeated for each node until all the nodes have been
applied to the new MachineConfig and converted to OVN Kubernetes.

#### Migration Cleanup

Once migration is complete, the admin can trigger the migration cleanup by:

```bash
$ oc patch Network.operator.openshift.io cluster --type='merge' --patch '{"spec":{"migration": null, "defaultNetwork":{ "openshiftSDNConfig": null}}'
```

CNO will:
- delete the openshift-sdn DaemonSets and the related resources
  (CustomResources, ConfigMaps, etc.).
- redeploy ovn-kubernetes in "normal" mode (no migration mode script, hybrid
  overlay disabled, etc.).
- remove the migration-related labels and node annotations from the nodes.

> #### Operation Procedure

Reviewer 2: General feedback on the manual touchpoints, we need to permit this to be done for any managed openshift (OSD/ROSA/ARO) whenever customer is ready.  We won't have SRE manually executing these steps.  It needs some controller to manage.  Is there a reason why this isn't handled as part of the migration automatically?  We need a way to express intent to start migration and an indicator when it's done.  In the middle if there are problems sufficient signal needs to be present so alerts can surface to SRE (or ops teams for self managed).  Each alert needs associated with clear steps on how to triage and fix known issues.  Of course, not everything will be known, we'll discover new things.  But some starting point will be needed else we go in blind.

Author: These steps can be automated and integrated into OCM. But that is out of the scope of this enhancement. As @Makdaam and I agreed, the SD team shall do the necessary UI and other changes in OCM. The cluster network operator and machine config operator will report errors in the corresponding ClusterOperator CRs. The detailed troubleshooting steps will be in the OCP document when the code is ready. The enhancement only contains the design of the feature.

1. To prepare the migration, users need to update the `network.operator` CR by
   entering the following command:

   ```bash
   $ oc patch Network.operator.openshift.io cluster --type='merge' --patch '{"spec":{"migration":{"networkType":"OVNKubernetes","isLive":true}}}"
   ```

2. Check the cluster network operator, While CNO deploys the resources of OVN
   Kubernetes, PROGRESSING will report `True`.

   ```bash
   $ oc get clusteroperators network
   ```

   Do not continue to the next step until PROGRESSING is listed as `False`

3. To begin the MTU migration, specify the migration configuration by entering
   the following command.

   ```bash
   $ oc patch Network.config.openshift.io cluster --type='merge' --patch '{"spec":{"networkType":"OVNKubernetes"}'
   ```

4. As the MCO updates machines in each machine config pool, it reboots each node
   one by one. You must wait until all the nodes are updated. Check the machine
   config pool status by entering the following command:

   ```bash
   $ oc get mcp
   ```

5. To finalize the live migration, cleanup original CNI and redeploy the target
   CNI in 'normal' mode, enter the following command

   ```bash

>    $ oc patch Network.operator.openshift.io cluster --type='merge' --patch '{"spec":{"migration": null, "defaultNetwork":{ "openshiftSDNConfig": null}}'

Reviewer 9: @pliurh This made me wonder if CNO will translate from  defaultNetwork.openshiftSDNConfig and set to defaultNetwork.OVNKubernetesConfig?

Author: No. Since I don't see there are any common settings that need to be translated, except MTU. In the offline migration, users are allowed to configure `defaultNetwork.OVNKubernetesConfig` before the migration. But if unset, CNO will just set it with default values. We will follow the same behavior in the live migration.

Regarding the MTU, CNO will check if it's possible to use the same cluster MTU as OSDN in OVN-K before migration. If not CNO will block the migration.

  - Egress IP
  - Egress Router
  - Multicast
- Migration from SDN Multi-tenant mode
- Support Hypershift clusters

## Pre-requisites

- OVN-IC multi-zone mode in OCP is dev-complete.

## Proposal

The key problem with doing a live SDN migration is that we need to maintain the
connectivity of the cluster network during the migration when pods are attached
to different networks. We propose to utilize the OVN Kubernetes hybrid overlay
feature to connect the networks owned by OpenShift SDN and OVN Kubernetes.

- We will run different plugins on different nodes, but both plugins will know
  how to reach pods owned by the other plugin, so all pods, services, etc.
  remain connected.
- During migration, CNO will take original-plugin nodes one by one and convert
  them to destination-plugin nodes, rebooting them in the process.
- The cluster network CIDR will remain unchanged, as will the node host subnet
  of each node.
- NetworkPolicy will work correctly throughout the migration.

### Limitations

- The following features, which are only supported by OpenShift SDN but not by
  OVN Kubernetes, will stop working when the migration is started.
  - Multitenant Isolation

> - The Egress Router feature is supported by both OpenShift SDN and OVN

Author: We support egress IP and egress FW metrics in OpenShift SDN. But not egress Router and Multicast.

> - The Egress Router feature is supported by both OpenShift SDN and OVN

Author: I am not sure if there metrics/telemetry available. @martinkennelly may know better.

Those CRs/CRDs will be removed after the migration. During the migration, it will be there but have no function. For egressIP, egressFW, and multicast. we will convert the CRs to new ones that are used by the target CNI.

> - The Egress Router feature is supported by both OpenShift SDN and OVN

Reviewer 12: That metric works for OVN-K and SDN.

> - The Egress Router feature is supported by both OpenShift SDN and OVN

Reviewer 10: Thank you, these are helpful. I can see us setting up some monitoring/alerting around these metrics (we have the ability to push custom telemetry to/from the managed fleet) in order to determine usage of these features and warn users ahead of the migration.

> - The Egress Router feature is supported by both OpenShift SDN and OVN

Reviewer 12: I am creating a doc to give to you folks that will have this: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SDN-4178
Id appreciate any feedback. Please watch this story.

   rather than using namespace VNIDs, since packets from OVN nodes will have the
   VNID 0 set.
2. To be compatible with Windows node VXLAN implementation, OVN Kubernetes
   hybrid overlay uses the peer host interface MAC as the VXLAN inner dest MAC
   for egress traffic. Therefore, when packets arrive at the br0 of the SDN
   node, they cannot be forwarded to the pod interface correctly. We need to add
   a flow to change the dst MAC to the pod interface MAC for such ingress
   traffic.

### MTU Consideration

There are two related but distinct MTU values to consider: the hardware MTU and
the cluster MTU. The cluster MTU is the MTU value for pod interfaces. It is
always less than your hardware MTU to account for the cluster network overlay
overhead. The overhead is 100 bytes for OVN Kubernetes and 50 bytes for SDN. For
example, if the hardware MTU is 1500, then the auto-probed cluster MTU would be
1400 for OVN Kubernetes and 1450 for OpenShift SDN. During the migration, this
MTU mismatch would break some cross-CNI traffic.

To avoid this issue, before starting the migration, users need to decrease the
cluster MTU by 50 bytes following this instruction:

> [changing-cluster-network-mtu](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/networking/changing-cluster-network-mtu.html).

Reviewer 10: This is tricky, because this isn't a fully automated process either.

Author: A fully automated process is not the target of this enhancement. As you can see in the procedure, both CNO and MCO are involved. So the automation shall use the APIs provided by CNO and MCO to do the work at a higher level.
For SD clusters, @Makdaam plans to implement the migration procedure in https://github.com/openshift/osdctl

   `openshift-sdn-node` process.

4. CNO will also deploy OVN Kubernetes to the cluster with hybrid overlay
   enabled. To avoid racing, the host subnet allocation will be disabled in
   OVN Kubernetes.
   
   The ovnkube-node container wrapper script will be rendered with the logic for
   migration:

   - If `br-ex` doesn't exist, it means the node has not yet been updated by
     MCO, so instead of starting the `ovnkube-node` process, it would run the
     `hybrid-overlay-node` process. `hybrid-overlay-node` can add the node
     annotation `k8s.ovn.org/hybrid-overlay-distributed-router-gateway-mac`,
     which is required by hybrid overlay.

     The script will also add the node annotation
     `k8s.ovn.org/hybrid-overlay-node-subnet`, according to the HostSubnet CR of
     this node.

   - If `br-ex` does exist, it means the node has been updated by MCO. So the
     `ovnkube-node` can be started.

     The script will also add the node annotation `k8s.ovn.org/node-subnets`
     according to the HostSubnet CR of this node.

#### Migration

When the condition 'Progressing' of the network Cluster Operator is switched

> from `True` to `False`, the admin can kick off the migration from CNO by:

Reviewer 10: Similar to the MTU procedure, is there a reason a human needs to do a multi-step process here? Is there a reason we can't declaratively say "move to OVN" and all the steps are done by operators?

Author: The answer is similar to the above.

the `status.networkType` field will trigger MCO to apply a new MachineConfig to
each node:

1. MCO will 
   - render the MachineConfig for each node.
   - try to cordon and drain the nodes based on
     `MachineConfigPools.spec.maxUnavailable`
2. MCO will drain and reboot the node.
3. When the node is up, br-ex will be created. It means the node is ready for
   OVN Kubernetes. So the local zone OVN Kubernetes components can be started.
   The ovnkube-node container wrapper script will also add the node annotation
  `k8s.ovn.org/node-subnets`, according to the HostSubnet CR of this node.
4. On the local node, OVN Kubernetes will add all SDN nodes as hybrid overlay
   nodes to the local zone and all OVN nodes as OVN-IC remote zones. On a remote
   OVN node, OVN Kubernetes will remove a hybrid overlay node and add an OVN-IC
   remote zone.
5. MCO will uncordon the node. Pods will be recreated on the node using
   ovn-kubernetes as the default CNI plugin.

The above process will be repeated for each node until all the nodes have been
applied to the new MachineConfig and converted to OVN Kubernetes.

#### Migration Cleanup

> Once migration is complete, the admin can trigger the migration cleanup by:

Reviewer 10: Same here.. we're again stating that a human has to do this, rather than an operator just cleaning up when it's done

Reviewer 2: osdctl is an SRE tool, it isn't used in automation afaik but could be wrong.  It's not the right place to think about automatino for the SD use case.  we cannot have SRE running migrations for anything, it needs to be a controller somewhere, preferably in-cluster.
